
Basic Electronics 

Electronics is a branch of science and technology that deals with the flow of electrons through non-metallic conductors, mainly semiconductors such as silicon. It is distinct from electrical science and technology, which deal with the flow of electrons and other charge carriers through metal conductors such as copper. This distinction started around 1906 with the invention by Lee De Forest of the triode. Until 1950 this field was called "radio technology" because its principal application was the design and theory of radio transmitters, receivers and vacuum tubes.

The study of semiconductor devices and related technology is considered a branch of physics, whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems come under electronics engineering. 

What are Electronic Components?

An electronic component is a basic electronic element usually packaged in a discrete form with two or more connecting leads or metallic pads. Components are intended to be connected together, usually by soldering to a printed circuit board, to create an electronic circuit with a particular function (for example an amplifier, radio receiver, or oscillator). Components may be packaged singly (resistor, capacitor, transistor, diode etc.) or in more or less complex groups as integrated circuits (operational amplifier, resistor array, logic gate etc.)














Electronic Components

Capacitors:	
An electronic component that stores up an electrical charge to a certain level and then releases it
A capacitor stores energy between two conducting plates separated by an insulator.


 
	Fig-1 Capacitor
Transistor:	   
A small electronic device containing a semiconductor and having at least three electrical contacts, used in a circuit as an amplifier, detector, or switch.

 
	Fig-2 Transistor

There are two types of standard transistors, NPN and PNP, with different circuit symbols. The letters refer to the layers of semiconductor material used to make the transistor. Most transistors used today are NPN because this is the easiest type to make from silicon

 
	
	Firg-3 Transistor Circuit symbols
Resistor:
A two-terminal electronic component that resists an electrical current and turns the extra current into heat 
Resistors are rated in ohms, and can be used to regulate the voltage and current in a circuit. Basically, a resistor resists the flow of electricity. Resistors are used to lower voltages and currents so that components that require smaller voltage/current can function properly. If a power supply puts out 12 volts and you have a chip that runs on three, you need a resistor to cut down the voltage

 
	Fig-4 Resistor 

Semiconductor:	
Semiconductor is a material that has a resistivity value between that of a conductor and an insulator. The conductivity of a semiconductor material can be varied under an external electrical field. Devices made from semiconductor materials are the foundation of modern electronics, including radio, computers, telephones, and many other devices. Semiconductor devices include the transistor, many kinds of diodes including the light-emitting diode, the silicon controlled rectifier, and digital and analog integrated circuits

Silicon is used to create most semiconductors commercially.  The other materials are used, including germanium, gallium arsenide, and silicon carbide. A pure semiconductor is often called an “intrinsic” semiconductor. The conductivity, or ability to conduct, of semiconductor material can be drastically changed by adding other elements, called “impurities” to the melted intrinsic material and then allowing the melt to solidify into a new and different crystal.
 
					Fig-5 Semiconductor














Basic Electronic Terminologies and Definitions:

Voltage:
Definition 1: The electrical force pushing electrons to obtain electrical current.
Definition 2: A measure of electrical potential
Definition 3: The rate at which energy is drawn from a source that produces a flow of electricity in a circuit. 

Voltage is measured in Volts (V).

Current:
The electrons flowing from one place to another known as current and it measured in  Amperes (A)

Power:
The rate at which work is performed or energy is transmitted or the amount of energy required for a given unit of time. As a rate of change of work done or the energy of a subsystem, it measured in Watts
 Power is: P = w/t
Where P is power, W is work and t is time

Circuit:
An electrical device that provides a path for electrical current to flow

Resistance (R): 
The electrical resistance of a circuit component or device is defined as the ratio of the voltage applied to the electric current
V = IR (Ohms Law)

R=V (voltage)/I (current)

Capacitance (C):
The ratio of the charge stored in a capacitor to the voltage (V) across the capacitor, 
I.e. C = Q/V

Frequency (f):
The number of repetitions per unit time of the oscillations of an electromagnetic wave (or other wave). The higher the frequency, the greater the energy of the radiation, and smaller the wavelength. Frequency is measured in Hertz


Hertz (Hz):
•	Equal to one cycle per second.
•	Hertz can be used to measure any periodic event; the most common uses for hertz are to describe radio and audio frequencies

Kilohertz (KHZ):
•	One thousand cycles per second
•	Kilohertz is unit of measurement for alternating current, audio signals, and a measurement of wireless signals

Megahertz (MHz):
•	One million cycles per second
•	Megahertz is the unit of measuring the bandwidth for high speed digital data, analog and digital video signals, and spread spectrum signals.

Gigahertz (GHz):
•	One billion cycles per second
•	It is commonly used to measure computer processing speeds
•	Computer CPU speeds were measured in megahertz, but after personal computers eclipsed the 1,000 MHz mark around the year 2000, gigahertz became the standard measurement unit. After all, it is easier to say "2.4 Gigahertz" than "2,400 Megahertz."

Clock Speed:

The clock speed is defined as the frequency at which a device executes instructions or that the data is processed. 

This clock speed is measured in millions of cycles per second or megahertz (MHz). 

The clock (Crystal Oscillator) itself is actually a quartz crystal that vibrates at a certain frequency when electricity is passed through it. Each vibration sends out a pulse or beat, like a metronome, to each component that's synchronized with it

Clock Period:
The time required to complete one cycle of AC and is calculated as the reciprocal of the frequency (1/f). It is measured in seconds and designated with the letter T.	

Electronic Signals:	 	
The information carrying signals are divided into two broad classes
1.	Analog Signals
2.	Digital Signals
Analog Signals:
Analog signals are continuous electrical signals that vary in time. Most of the time, the variations follow that of the non-electric (original) signal. Therefore, the two are analogous hence the name analog. 
 
Figure 6: Analog Signal
Not all analog signals vary as smoothly as the waveform shown in Figure 1. Analog signals represent some physical quantity and they are a ‘MODEL’ of the real quantity.
Example:
Telephone voice signal is analog. The intensity of the voice causes electric current variations. At the receiving end, the signal is reproduced in the same proportion. Hence the electric current is a ‘MODEL’ but not one’s voice since it is an electrical representation or analog of one’s voice.
Digital Signals:
Digital signals are non-continuous, they change in individual steps. They consist of pulses or digits with discrete levels or values. The value of each pulse is constant, but there is a sudden change from one digit to the next. Digital signals have two amplitude levels called nodes. The value of which are specified as one of two possibilities such as 1 or 0, HIGH or LOW, TRUE or FALSE and so on. In reality, the values are anywhere within specific ranges and we define values within a given range.



 
	Fig-7 Digital Signal	


Buses:
A bus is a subsystem that transfers data between computer components inside a computer or between computers. Early computer buses were literally parallel electrical buses with multiple connections, but the term is now used for any physical arrangement that provides the same logical functionality as a parallel electrical bus. Modern computer buses can use both parallel and bit-serial connections, and can be wired in either a multidrop (electrical parallel) or daisy chain topology, or connected by switched hubs, as in the case of USB.
Buses can be parallel buses, which carry data words in parallel on multiple wires, or serial buses, which carry data in bit-serial form. The addition of extra power and control connections, differential drivers, and data connections in each direction usually means that most serial buses have more conductors than the minimum of one used in the 1-Wire serial bus.

Basic units 

Bit:

BIT stands for Binary Digit

A bit is a binary digit, taking a logical value of either "1" or "0" (also referred to as "true" or "false" respectively). Binary digits are a basic unit used for storage and communication in digital computing and digital information theory.



Byte:
A byte is simply eight contiguous bits (also known as an octet). It is eight 1s or 0s side by side. So it can store 2^8 = 2*2*2*2*2*2*2*2 = 256 values. Ignoring the possibility of negative numbers (more on signed integers later), that means a byte can hold numbers 0 to 255.
In human understandable form, 1 character is one Byte.
Kilobyte:
Kilobyte (derived from the SI prefix "kilo-", meaning 1,000) is a unit of digital information storage equal to either 1,024 bytes (210) or 1,000 bytes (103), depending on context.
It is abbreviated in a number of ways: KB, kB, K and Kbyte.
Megabyte:
 A Megabyte is approximately 1,000 Kilobytes. In the early days of computing, a Megabyte was considered to be a large amount of data. These days with a 500 Gigabyte hard drive on a computer being common, a Megabyte doesn't seem like much anymore. One of those old 3-1/2 inch floppy disks can hold 1.44. 100. 600 Megabytes is about the amount of data that will fit on a CD-ROM disk.
Gigabyte:
 A Gigabyte is approximately 1,000 Megabytes. A Gigabyte is a very common term used these days when referring to disk space or drive storage. 1 Gigabyte of data is almost twice the amount of data that a CD-ROM can hold. But it's about one thousand times the capacity of a 3-1/2 floppy disk. Nowadays RAM storage capacity has moved from MB to GB.
Terabyte:
 A Terabyte is approximately one trillion bytes, or 1,000 Gigabytes. Now we are getting up there to a size that is so large that it is not a common term yet. To put it in some perspective, a Terabyte could hold about 3.6 million 300 Kilobyte images or maybe about 300 hours of good quality video














Nibble:

Half of a byte is of course a Nibble (sometimes written nybble).The important thing to remember is that a 4 bit number means it can store 2^4 = 16 values. Usually 0 to 15 if it is unsigned.


1 bit = a 1 or 0 (b) 
4 bits = 1 nibble (?)
8 bits = 1 byte (B) 
1024 bytes = 1 Kilobyte (KB) 
1024 Kilobytes = 1 Megabyte (MB) 
1024 Megabytes = 1 Gigabyte (GB) 
1024 Gigabytes = 1 Terabyte (TB)

WORD:

Word is a term for the natural unit of data used by a particular computer design. A word is simply a fixed-sized group of bits that are handled together by the machine. The number of bits in a word 
(The word size or word length) is an important characteristic of computer architecture.

16 bits form a word

The majority of the registers in the computer are usually word-sized. The typical numeric value manipulated by the computer is probably word sized. The amount of data transferred between the processing part of the computer and the memory system is most often a word. An address used to designate a location in memory often fits in a word.

DWORD:

Dword (double word) is a unit of data that is twice the size of a word (i.e. 32 bits).

Qword:

A qword (or quadword, or quadruple word) is a unit of data that is four times the size of a word.


 

Number System:
A number system is a set of numbers, (in the broadest sense of the word), together with one or more operations, such as addition or multiplication.
Examples of number systems include: natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, algebraic numbers, real numbers, complex numbers, 
Binary system:

The binary numeral system, or base-2 number system represents numeric values using two symbols, usually 0 and 1. More specifically, the usual base-2 system is a positional notation with a radix of 2. Owing to its straightforward implementation in digital electronic circuitry using logic gates, the binary system is used internally by all modern computers

Octal system:

The octal numeral system, or Oct for short, is the base-8 number system, and uses the digits 0 to 7. Numerals can be made from binary numerals by grouping consecutive binary digits into groups of three (starting from the right). For example, the binary representation for decimal 74 is 1001010, which can be grouped into (00)1 001 010 — so the octal representation is 112.

Decimal system:

The decimal (base ten or occasionally denary) numeral system has ten as its base. It is the most widely used numeral system

Hexadecimal system:
In mathematics and computer science, hexadecimal (also base-16, hexa, or hex) is a numeral system with a radix, or base, of 16. It uses sixteen distinct symbols, most often the symbols 0–9 to represent values zero to nine, and A, B, C, D, E, F (or a through f) to represent values ten to fifteen.
Its primary use is as a human friendly representation of binary coded values, so it is often used in digital electronics and computer engineering. Since each hexadecimal digit represents four binary digits (bits)—also called a nibble—it is compact and easily translated shorthand to express values in base two.


 

Logic Gates:

A logic gate performs a logical operation on one or more logic inputs and produces a single logic output. The logic normally performed is Boolean logic and is most commonly found in digital circuits. Logic gates are primarily implemented electronically using diodes or transistors, but can also be constructed using electromagnetic relays, fluidics, optics, molecules, or even mechanical elements.

In electronic logic, a logic level is represented by a voltage or current, (which depends on the type of electronic logic in use). Each logic gate requires power so that it can source and sink currents to achieve the correct output voltage. In logic circuit diagrams the power is not shown, but in a full electronic schematic

NAND and NOR logic gates are the two pillars of logic, in that all other types of Boolean logic gates (i.e., AND, OR, NOT, XOR, XNOR) can be created from a suitable network of just NAND or just NOR gates. They can be built from relays or transistors, or any other technology that can create an inverter and a two-input AND or OR gate. Hence the NAND and NOR gates are called the universal gates.

Basic Logical Gates:

There are seven basic logic gates: AND, OR, XOR, NOT, NAND, NOR, and XNOR.

AND Gate:

The AND gate is a digital logic gate that implements logical conjunction - it behaves according to the truth table to the right. A HIGH output (1) results only if both the inputs to the AND gate are HIGH (1). If neither or only one input to the AND gate is HIGH, a LOW output results

 
AND gate

Input 1(A)	Input 2(B)	Output C
0	0	0
0	1	0
1	0	0
1	1	1

	AND Gate truth table
The AND gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression. C=A.B
 

OR Gate:

The OR gate is a digital logic gate that implements logical disjunction - it behaves according to the truth table to the right. A HIGH output (1) results if one or both the inputs to the gate are HIGH (1). If neither input is HIGH, a LOW output (0) results.
 
OR gate

Input A	Input B	Output C
0	0	0
0	1	1
1	0	1
1	1	1
	
	OR Gate Truth table
The OR gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression. C=A+B
NOT Gate:

A logical inverter, sometimes called a NOT gate to differentiate it from other types of electronic inverter devices, has only one input. It reverses the logic state.

 
Inverter or NOT gate

Input	Output
1	0
0	1
	
	NOT Gate Truth Table
                               
                          			 _						
The logical expression for NOT gate is A=A

NAND Gate:
The NAND gate operates as an AND gate followed by a NOT gate. It acts in the manner of the logical operation "and" followed by negation. The output is "false" if both inputs are "true." Otherwise, the output is "true."
 
NAND gate
Input A	Input B	Output C
0	0	1
0	1	1
1	0	1
1	1	0
 
	NAND Gate Truth Table	
						___
The NAND gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression.  C=A.B
NOR:
The NOR gate is a combination OR gate followed by an inverter. Its output is "true" if both inputs are "false." Otherwise, the output is "false."
 
NOR gate
Input A	Input B	Output C
0	0	1
0	1	0
1	0	0
1	1	0
	
	NOR Gate Truth table
						___
The NOR gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression.    C=A+B
						

 
XOR Gate:
The XOR (exclusive-OR) gate acts in the same way as the logical "either/or." The output is "true" if either, but not both, of the inputs are "true." The output is "false" if both inputs are "false" or if both inputs are "true." Another way of looking at this circuit is to observe that the output is 1 if the inputs are different, but 0 if the inputs are the same.
 
 XOR gate
Input A	Input B	Output C
0	0	0
0	1	1
1	0	1
1	1	0
 
	XOR Gate Truth table

The XOR gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression.    C=A (+) B

XNOR Gate:
The XNOR (exclusive-NOR) gate is a combination XOR gate followed by an inverter. Its output is "true" if the inputs are the same, and” false" if the inputs are different.
 
XNOR gate
Input A	Input B	Output C
0	0	1
0	1	0
1	0	0
1	1	1

	XNOR Gate Truth table


						_______
The XOR gate with inputs A and B and output C implements the logical expression.     C=A (+) B
